- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
[upbeat music]
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm
a Professor of Neurobiology
and Ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we're going to talk
all about how to optimize
your workspace for maximum productivity.
Indeed, that means to
heighten levels of focus,
to increase levels of creativity,
to improve your ability to task switch.
And this could be for sake
of school or for work,
creative endeavors, personal endeavors,
this really extends to everybody.
Most often when we hear about how to focus
or how to get the most
out of our work sessions,
we hear about the biology
and the psychology of that.
We hear about dopamine and
we hear about serotonin
and we hear about caffeine.
And indeed, those are topics
that I've covered a lot
on The Huberman Lab Podcast.
Today, we will touch on each of those,
but we are mainly going
to focus on how we arrange
our physical environment and
indeed how we arrange ourselves
in that physical environment,
in order to bring out the
best in our neurobiology.
That is how to put ourselves
into a heightened state of
focus by virtue of things,
as simple as where we place our
screen, relative to our eyes
at a given time of day.
Believe it or not, there's
excellent research on this,
and there's excellent
research for instance,
on whether or not you should
or should not listen to music,
whether or not you should use
things like binaural beats,
and if so, what frequency
of binaural beats.
We are going to cover all
of that, and by the end,
you'll have a checklist
of things that you can do
to optimize your workspace on any budget.
I will mention various products and apps
that some of you might find useful
for optimizing your workspace.
But I want to emphasize at
the outset that none of those
that I mentioned are any products or apps
that we have a financial relationship to.
And more importantly, you don't need them.
I'm going to explain how for zero cost,
you can arrange your workspace in ways
that makes you maximally
productive, maximally focus
and allows you to adapt your workspace
to different environments,
whether or not you're traveling,
working with others,
working alone, et cetera.
Just to give you a little
hint of where we are going,
I will mention a zero
cost app that will deliver
binaural beats at a particular frequency
that peer-reviewed research
has shown can enhance
certain types of learning and memory.
However, peer-reviewed research also shows
that it can diminish performance
in other types of tasks.
So stay tuned, we'll
go into all the details
so that you can optimize
your workspace for zero cost
and get the most out of
your efforts and endeavors.
Before we begin, I'd like to
emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however, part of
my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is LMNT.
LMNT is an electrolyte drink
that has everything you need
and none of the things you don't.
And when we say everything you
need, the main one is salt.
Now, salt, aka sodium
has kind of a bad rap.
We've all heard that too
much salt is bad for us.
However, if you look into
the research on salt,
and in fact, if you go to
one of the highest level,
peer-reviewed scientific
publications, Science Magazine,
you can find a review article
in science some years ago
that shows that most of
what we think and understand
about the science of
salt is completely wrong.
And in fact, salt does a number of things
that's extremely important.
For instance, our neurons,
which signal to one another
through electricity and
through chemical signaling,
critically rely on having enough sodium
in order to generate what
we call action potentials
or electrical firing of neurons.
If your sodium levels are too low,
your neurons simply won't work.
One of the main deficits
from being dehydrated
is lack of sodium, not just lack of water.
Getting sufficient sodium
does a number of things
that's very important, it
can raise your blood volume,
it can help you retain
water in a healthy way,
not excess amounts.
It allows neurons to fire
for sake of thinking,
for sake of athletic
performance, and so on.
Other electrolytes that are in LMNT
are things like magnesium and potassium,
which are also essential
for neuronal function,
and indeed all organ function.
LMNT has a lot of salt, some magnesium
and some potassium, so
unless you're somebody
who really has chronic hypertension,
elevating your level of salt
intake can often be beneficial.
You should check with your doctor,
but indeed it can often be beneficial.
LMNT contains a science-backed
electrolyte ratio
of a 1,000 milligrams,
that's one gram of sodium,
200 milligrams of potassium
and 60 milligrams of magnesium.
It tastes delicious, I
happen to like the raspberry
or citrus flavors, in fact,
I like all of the flavors.
Put in some water, you
can make it as dense,
meaning as high concentration as you like.
So some people will put it
in eight ounces of water.
I like mine in about 16 ounces of water
and I'll drink that
before and after exercise.
And I usually will have
another one throughout the day,
just sip on it as I'm
doing work and so forth.
If you'd like to try LMNT,
you can go to drinklmnt.com/huberman,
spelled drinklmnt.com/huberman
to claim a free LMNT sample pack,
you only cover the cost of shipping.
Again, that's drinklmnt.com/huberman
to claim a free sample pack.
Today's episode is also brought
to us by Athletic Greens,
now referred to as AG1.
I started taking AG1 way back in 2012,
and so I'm delighted that
they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason I started taking AG1
and the reason I still take
AG1 once or twice a day
is that it helps me meet all
of my foundational vitamin,
mineral and probiotic needs.
And when people ask me,
what's the one supplement
I should take, if they were
to only take one supplement,
I always recommend AG1.
For the simple reason that the vitamins,
the minerals and the probiotic
support metabolic health,
they support endocrine health,
they support brain health
and the probiotics and prebiotics
in there in particular,
support the so-called gut-brain axis.
There is now a plethora of
data supporting the fact
that when we have a
healthy gut microbiome,
that has little microbes
that live in our gut,
that are good for us, our
gut signals to our brain
and our brain signals back to
our gut, in ways that support
our immune system, our
digestion, even our mood.
They can even support healthy
levels of dopamine signaling,
an important molecule for motivation
and high levels of mood or positive mood.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim a special offer.
They'll give you five free
travel packs plus a year supply
of vitamin D3 K2.
Vitamin D3 K2 has been
shown to be important
for metabolic health, endocrine health
and K2 in particular for heart health
and regulating appropriate
amounts of calcium in your bones.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim the special offer.
Today's episode is also
brought to us by Theragun.
Theragun is a handheld percussive device
that releases deep muscle tension.
I was first introduced to
Theragun on a shark diving trip.
We were way out in the Pacific,
filming great white sharks
for my laboratory where we study fear,
and everyone was diving all day,
carrying what are called Pelican cases,
which aren't actual pelicans with wings,
but cases for these cameras.
They're very heavy,
removing things all day,
we're working really hard,
and we got really sore.
I got particularly sore from
all that physical labor.
Someone brought a Theragun along,
I'd never seen one of these
things before or tried one
and I spent the rest of the
trip trying to get as much time
with the Theragun as I could,
at least when I was on board the boat.
With Theragun, you can
get what is effectively
a deep tissue massage to
any area of your body,
and you can just do that
for minutes or hours
for as long as you like,
it's really wonderful.
If you have someone else there,
who's willing to use the
Theragun on hard to reach places
like your back, that's even better.
Whether or not you want
to treat muscle tension
from working out and injury
or just deal with daily stress
from everyday life, there's
really no substitute
for the Theragun.
You know, professional
massage is wonderful,
but a professional
massage of course involves
going to a masseuse, it's quite
expensive often, et cetera.
If you're interested
in getting a Theragun,
they start at only $199.
You can go to
Theragun.com/huberman right now
to get your Gen 4 Theragun today.
You have a 30-day money back guarantee,
that's Theragun.com/huberman.
Let's talk about workspace optimization.
This is a topic that's intrigued
me for a very long time
because my undergraduate
advisor, my graduate advisor
and my postdoc advisor
had many things in common,
including being great
scientists, being kind people
and terrific mentors, but they
had another thing in common,
which always perplexed me,
which is that their offices
were a complete disaster.
They had mountains of
books, mountains of papers,
mountains of all sorts of stuff.
And yet all of them were
extremely productive
and could remain extremely focused
in that incredibly cluttered environment.
Now I'm somebody who doesn't like clutter,
I find it very hard to focus
in cluttered environments.
And indeed there's tremendous
variation among people
as to whether or not
they can remain focused
or whether or not they struggle to focus
in physically cluttered environments.
There's no right or wrong to this,
but the question we should ask ourselves
is why were they all
able to be so focused?
And it turns out that
the reason they were able
to be so focused is that
they all captured one single
and yet fundamental variable
of workspace optimization.
And we'll talk about
what that variable is.
In fact, where you're to talk
about what all the variables
of optimizing a workspace
are things like vision,
things like light, things
like noise in the room,
whether or not you listen to music or not,
whether or not you use noise
canceling headphones or not.
We're going to talk about all of that
and we're going to do that in a way
that you can optimize your workspace,
regardless of whether
or not you are at home,
whether or not you're
on the road, et cetera.
Because the last thing
I would ever want to do
is to create a situation where you find
the optimal workspace,
and then you are a slave
to that optimal workspace.
That's just not the way the world works.
What you want to do or
my goal for you rather,
is that you will have a
short checklist of things
that you can look to, anytime
you sit down to do work,
and you can think about
the underlying variables
that impact your brain and your body
and allow your brain and body
to get into the optimal state
in order to learn, in
order to be productive
and indeed to move through your
work bouts in a very relaxed
and pleasureful way
while maintaining focus
and while pursuing any
of the number of things
that you're doing.
The first variable we want to think about
in terms of workspace
optimization is vision and light.
On a previous episode of
The Huberman Lab Podcast,
devoted all to habits, I
talked about the importance
of dividing your 24 hour day
into three different phases.
And for those of you that
haven't heard that episode,
I'm just going to briefly
summarize what I described.
From the time you wake up in
the morning until about six
or seven or eight,
sometimes nine hours later,
your brain is in a unique state.
It is in a state of
high levels of dopamine,
a neuromodulator, and
high levels of epinephrin,
as well as hormones like
cortisol and so forth.
Without going into the
biology of those things,
they set your brain into
a state of high alertness.
And this is true, whether or not
you indulge in caffeine or not.
I know some of you say, oh,
I really don't wake up
until the afternoon,
I'm much more alert and
focused in the afternoon.
We will talk about that phase
of the 24 hour day in a moment.
But that early part of
the day is a time of day
in which for sake of
workspace optimization,
being in a brightly lit
environment can lend itself
to optimal work throughout the day,
not just during that early phase.
And so while on many
episodes of this podcast,
I've also emphasized the
importance of getting
morning sunlight in your eyes
within 30 to 60 minutes of waking,
not as often, but now, and
again, I will also mention
that it's important to light
your daytime environment
as brightly as you safely can.
So if you are going to be
doing work in this early,
what I call phase one portion of your day,
you want to have as much light and indeed
as much overhead light shining
on you as safely possible.
And of course you don't want
it so bright that it's glaring
and you have to squint, et cetera,
but you want as much light
as is safely possible.
And you can do that a
couple of simple ways.
One is if do own or
you're in an environment,
we have overhead lights, turn
on those overhead lights.
What's special about overhead
lights for setting alertness
is that the neurons in
our eyes, which are called
melanopsin ganglion cells,
that's the fancy name.
Melanopsin ganglion
cells are mainly enriched
in the lower half of
our retinas in our eyes
and view the upper visual field.
Those neurons send little wires to an area
of our hypothalamus, right
above the roof of our mouth,
that creates a state of alertness.
Now, early in the day, we want
to be as alert as possible.
And this phase one of our circadian cycle
is when we are best at doing
analytic detailed type work.
So we're going to go into other aspects
of workspace optimization that
are important for phase one,
but during phase one, again,
within zero to about eight
or nine hours after waking, bright lights
in your environment, in
particular overhead lights,
are going to facilitate focus,
they're going to facilitate
further release of things like
dopamine and norepinephrine
and healthy amounts of cortisol.
And we want that to
happen early in the day
for a variety of reasons.
For instance, we don't
want that cortisol peak
to happen too late in the day.
That's actually associated
with depression and insomnia
and a number of things
that we just don't want.
So one of the things that
I've done for my workspace
is to make sure that when
I wake up in the morning,
I do go get my sunlight.
If the sun isn't out, I turn on
as many bright artificial
lights as I can manage
or tolerate, and then I go
get my sunlight exposure.
But once I set out to do some work
that all the overhead
lights in that room are on,
as well as lights in front of me.
And that's again to stimulate
heightened levels of focus
and further release of
these neuromodulators
that I mentioned before, dopamine,
norepinephrine and epinephrine.
Now the way that one could do that
could be a very low cost
way of having, for instance,
a desk lamp and those overhead lights.
If you're somebody that wants to take this
to the next level, you can
purchase a ring light, which is,
I think those are mainly made for people
doing selfie type videos,
for Instagram posts
and things of that sort.
Ring lights can be pretty cost-effective,
and yet they're very bright and
they have the sort of bright
blue light that is going
to optimally stimulate
those melanopsin ganglion cells.
So some people I know
will have a blue light
or a bright LED on their
desk in front of them.
And indeed I have one of these,
I don't use a ring light,
I use a light pad.
The particular light pad
I use, I bought on Amazon.
I can mention the brand, but again,
I have no financial affiliation to them,
this is the Artograph Lightpad
is designed for drawing.
And it says on it 930 lux,
Lux is just a measure of brightness.
So I place that on the desk in
front of me and I turn it on
essentially throughout
this phase one of the day.
Even if I walk away from the
desk, I tend to keep it on,
it doesn't consume that much energy.
And in that way, I'm constantly
being bombarded with photons
that keep my levels of alertness up
because the early part of the day
is when I do the majority
of that focused work.
Again, you don't need the light pad,
you can use a ring light,
or you can simply use
any kind of other lights
that you might happen to
have artificial lights.
For those of you that can
place your desk near a window,
and even better to open the window,
that would be really fantastic.
I don't have access to that.
Why would I say open the window?
Well, it turns out that sunlight
is going to be the best stimulus
for waking up your brain
and body through this
melanopsin hypothalamus system.
And by looking at
sunlight through a window,
it's 50 times less effective
than if that window
were to be open, mostly because
those windows filter out
a lot of the wavelengths of blue light
that are essential for
stimulating the eyes
and this wake-up signal.
So all of this has rests on the premise
that we need to be alert
in order to do our work,
in particular focused work.
And I've talked about before
in the Habits episode,
and I'm saying again now,
that first phase of the day,
that first seven or eight
or nine hours of the day
is really the time in
which our neurochemistry
is primed for getting the most amount
of focused kind of challenging work done
where a lot of precision
and detail is required.
So you want to brightly
light your work environment
during that first phase, again,
from the time you wake up,
try and get sunlight, but
then even if you're going
to get exercise or do other things,
you want to get as much
bright light in your eyes
as you safely can
and then you want to light
your work environment.
Now in the afternoon,
starting at about nine
and continuing until about
16 hours after waking,
you want to start dimming the
lights in that environment.
Now you don't want to make it dark
because you don't want to get sleepy
at two o'clock in the afternoon,
unless you're going to take a brief nap,
which I do and is perfectly fine,
as long as it doesn't interfere
with your nighttime sleep.
But the idea is that in
this so-called phase two
of the 24 hour cycle from
about nine to 16 hours
after waking, you want to bring
the level of lights down a bit.
And when I say down,
I literally mean down.
Having lights that are
in front of you is fine,
but overhead lights at that
time are not going to be optimal
for the sorts of neurochemical states
that your brain wants to be in.
The states that I'm
referring to are a shift
from the dopamine and norepinephrine
that's highest early
in the day to increases
in things like serotonin
and other neuromodulators
that put your brain into
a state that's better
for creative endeavors or
for more abstract thinking.
Now, as we'll soon see, there
are other things you can do
to improve creative thinking
and abstract thinking.
And in fact, there are things you can do
to improve analytic thing,
and we will talk about those,
things that are distinct from light,
but right now we're
just focusing on light.
So what I recommend doing,
and what I personally do
is I will turn off overhead
lights in the afternoon.
It's not completely dim,
it's not completely dark,
but I will start to reduce
the amount of overhead light
and just simply keep the light pad on
and whatever other lamps
I happen to be using.
Now, one thing we haven't talked
about is screen brightness.
This is highly individual,
people have different
retinal sensitivities.
What I mean by that is everybody differs
in terms of how bright they can tolerate
their visual environment and their screen.
And whether or not you are
sensitive to light or not,
will depend on a lot of factors.
Some of it is eye color,
indeed people with darker color eyes
generally can tolerate more
bright light than others.
I have green eyes, I am very,
very sensitive to light.
If I'm outdoors at a cafe or something,
and the table has any kind
of reflective properties
and it's a sunny day, I
can barely see the person
across the table from me,
unless I'm wearing sunglasses.
Some people, other members
of my family for instance,
have dark brown eyes
and can just sit there
and have a conversation without the need
for sunglasses at all.
So that's, there's
tremendous variation there,
one or the other isn't healthy
or advantageous necessarily,
just understand that you never
want to be in an environment
where it's painful to maintain
looking at whatever it is
that you're looking at.
If something's painful to look at,
it could be damaging to your eyes,
so you do want to protect your eyes.
Now, in this second phase of the day,
since most of us are working indoors,
but even if you're working outdoors,
you want to try and get the
amount of light reduced overall,
but in particular, that overhead light,
and you also want to start reducing
the amount of blue light
that you're being exposed to.
So somewhere around four or 5:00 pm,
which for me is about 12
hours after I've been awake
or 14 hours after I've been awake,
I will turn off that light
pad and start to transition
the lights in my environment
to more yellows and reds.
Now, I can't always do this,
I have friends that actually
have converted their entire
homes from blue light
early in the day to red
light late in the day,
that's really cool and
fantastic, I haven't done that.
There's a cost to doing
that and it is optimal
in terms of optimizing productivity
and sleep and so forth,
but it's not feasible for a lot of people.
But what I do is I simply
switch to using yellow lamps.
I will turn off that LED
in the later afternoon,
again, around four or 5:00
pm, and I tend to wake up
around 6:00 am or so, I'll turn those off.
And what I'll try and do also
is I'll try and dim the screen
that I'm working on so
that I can still manage
to see everything that I need to see,
but it's quite a bit dimmer
than it was early in the day.
So that's phase two of the day,
and that's how we want
to think about light.
And then I'll just mention,
because I know there are people
who are working in the
middle of the night,
there's phase three,
which is about 17 to
24 hours after waking.
And I realize that for
shift workers or for people
that are pulling all
nighters or for students,
oftentimes you need to
be awake and studying
in the middle of the night.
I, myself am somebody who
for years would pull anywhere
from five to 10 all-nighters per year.
I still pull an all
nighter now, and again,
because of deadlines and so forth.
I don't recommend it, if
you can avoid it, great,
but many people just
simply have to do this
for sake of shift work or
because of impending deadlines
or procrastination or all of the above.
If you are going to be doing
work in that third phase
of your circadian cycle,
you really want to limit
the amount of bright light that
you're getting in your eyes
to just the amount that
allows you to do the work
that you're doing.
Because if you get light in your eyes,
that's any brighter than that,
you're going to severely
deplete your melatonin levels.
You're going to severely
shift your circadian clock
and it's effectively like
traveling to another time zone.
So if you stay up from
3:00 am until 6:00 am
or 2:00 am until 4:00 am
working on a term paper
or something of that sort,
and you're getting bright
light in your eyes,
you are effectively flying six hours
to a different time zone,
or at least that's what
your body registers it as.
And it can really throw your
sleep and your metabolism
and a number of other things out of whack.
Now there's an exception to this,
which is if you really want to be awake,
it can often be beneficial
to flipping on all the lights
in the room and keeping
them really bright.
One of the hardest things to
do is to stay up all night
studying when you're in a dim environment.
So you have to determine the trade off
between whether or not you
want to shift your clock
or whether or not you
want to get the work done.
And I would say the ideal
situation is to sleep at night
and to do your work during
the day and in the afternoon,
but if you do have to be awake
in the middle of the night,
do understand that you want
to dim those lights overall.
You would not want to use that LED,
you would not want to
have overhead lights on,
unless you're really
struggling to stay awake,
in which case you want to get
as many bright lights on as possible.
So there are a couple of
tricks to all-nighters,
I don't really want people
pulling all-nighters
unless they have to, but
there are a few things
that you can do without taking stimulants
in order to stay up all
night, that can be beneficial
that maximize on your biology.
One of them that's a
little less commonly known
is you can drink 32
ounces of water and commit
to not going to the bathroom
for 90 minutes, at least.
It turns out that there is a circuit
that goes from your
bladder, literally neurons
that go from your
bladder to your brainstem
and when you have to urinate,
it makes you very alert.
And as many of you have
probably experienced,
this is actually what wakes us up
in the middle of the night when
we have to use the bathroom
is this circuit for alertness
that goes from full bladder,
it's signaled by the bladder
being full to the brainstem.
And this is the circuit that is disrupted
in kids that have bedwetting issues.
And there are a number of
cognitive behavioral approaches
to that, sometimes
bedwetting in very young kids
is because the circuit
hasn't developed yet.
Most adults fortunately
are not bedwetting,
but you can increase the amount
of alertness in your system
and remain awake in the
middle of the night,
by drinking a little bit more
water than you normally would
and then refraining from
going to the restroom,
that certainly will lend
itself to alertness.
You know how difficult
it is to fall asleep
when you have to use the
restroom for instance.
So that's one tool.
The other thing is again, to
flip on as many bright lights
in the environment as possible.
And then of course, people
will rely on stimulants
like caffeine or even more
aggressive stimulants.
That's not something I
necessarily recommend,
you'll each have to
determine that for you.
But if you do in fact,
have to use all-nighters
for any reason, you can maximize
this bladder to brain approach
and the right light approach.
So that more or less
covers how bright to keep
your overall environment and
how bright to keep your screen.
If you really want to
get nerdy about this,
there is a free app called
Light Meter where you can start
measuring how many lux, how many photons
are in a given environment.
It's actually measuring
reflectance of photons and so on,
if you can look up what a
Lux Meter does, if you like,
I don't necessarily recommend doing that.
I don't want to set a
critical threshold by which,
for instance, we say,
once your environment
is more than 1,500 lux,
then it's too bright
or not bright enough, et cetera.
Everyone has different
retinal sensitivities,
everyone will find that
different levels of brightness
will cause them to be alert,
different levels of dimness,
if you will, in the room will
cause them to feel sleepy.
You really want to just modulate
across the 24 hour cycle
where it's very bright,
as bright as safely can be
early in the day so that you are alert.
You can do your focus detailed
work in that first phase,
and then in the afternoon, as you move
into more creative type
works or abstract thinking,
or working with other people
in kind of a brainstorming mode
that you would shift to
dimmer lights, yellow lights,
eliminate the blue lights
as much as possible.
Now that's light, but there's
another aspect of vision
that has been shown to
be critically important
for how alert we are going to be
and how well we can
maintain that alertness.
And that has to do with
where our visual focus is
in a given environment.
So I'm not talking about
overall brightness,
what I'm referring to now is simply
where you place your phone or your tablet
or computer screen or book,
whatever it is that you
happen to be looking at.
There's a very underappreciated
and yet incredible aspect
of our neurology that has
to do with the relationship
between where we look and
our level of alertness.
And it works in a very logical way,
we have clusters of
neurons in our brain stem
and those clusters of neurons
control our eyelid muscles
and they control our eye
movements up and down
into the sides.
And indeed, if you were
to look at an eyeball,
I looked at a lot of eyeballs in my lab
and I teach neural anatomy, so
we do this from time to time,
we would see that there are six muscles
attached to your eyeball.
Now four of them are located
at the top, the bottom
and the two sides of your eyeball,
sort of at the 12 o'clock,
six o'clock, three o'clock
and nine o'clock of your eyeball.
And those muscles can move
your eye in the socket
from side to side and up and down.
And then we also have some muscles
that can actually pull
the eyeballs at angles.
So we have different muscles
that can move the eyes
at different angles as well,
and that's why we can look
up into the side or down into the side,
not just from side to side or up or down.
Now, the neurons that
control those muscles
have a very interesting feature,
which is that when we are
looking down toward the ground
or anywhere below, basically
the central region of our face,
the neurons that control that eye movement
are intimately related
to areas of the brainstem
that release certain
types of neuromodulators
and neurotransmitters.
And they activate areas of
the brain that are associated
with calm and indeed, even with sleepiness
and there's an active
inhibition or prevention
of neurons that increase alertness.
Now the opposite is also
true, we have neurons
that place our eyes into an upward gaze
above the sort of level of our nose
and up above our forehead.
Literally looking up while
keeping the head stationary,
or if you tilt your head
back and you look up,
these neurons are still active.
Those neurons don't just
control the position of the eyes
and cause them to move up, they
also trigger the activation
of brain circuits that are
associated with alertness.
Now, this is a fundamental
feature of the way that our eyes
and brain are wired
together and how they relate
to what we call autonomic arousal.
And there are a bunch of details there.
We will actually have a guest
in a few weeks who has learned
to exploit these neurons and
the fact that they control
these different states
of calm or alertness
in order to generate hypnotic
states, to place people
into very atypical states
in which they are both
very alert and very calm.
We'll save that for a future episode.
But the important thing to understand
is when you are looking down
below the level of your nose,
you are essentially
decelerating your alertness.
You're reducing your amount of alertness,
it might be subtle, but it's happening.
Whereas when you look straight
ahead or in particular,
when you look up, you're
increasing your level of alertness.
Now this has some obvious implications.
When we get sleepy, our
eyelids tend to close
and we tend to nod down,
when we're wide awake,
we tend to be wide-eyed, we
don't tend to blink as often.
And we tend to be chin up
and kind of on vigilance
and alertness.
So this has a evolutionary,
or at least an adaptive component to it.
This can be exploited, and
indeed it's been researched
in terms of how it can be used
to optimize work environments.
Contrary to what most people do,
which is to look down at their
laptop, tablet, or phone,
if you want to be alert
and you want to maintain
the maximum amount of
focus for whatever it is
that you're reading or
doing, you want that screen
or whatever it is that you're looking at
to at least be at eye level
and ideally slightly above it.
Now, I haven't seen many
workspaces that take advantage
of this very hardwired
neuro-biological fact.
So what should you do
with this information?
Well, if you're somebody
who sits down to do work
and starts to feel sleepy,
or simply unfocused,
unable to attend to whatever
it is that you're doing,
I highly recommend that you
take your laptop or tablet.
I do hope that most people
aren't doing serious work
on their phones because it's
such a small visual window,
and we can talk about why
that's an issue later.
And the idea would be to place
that screen of your tablet
or your laptop or other computer,
and try and get it elevated
at least to nose level,
your nose level, or even higher.
Now I realize that can
be complicated to do,
I've long, just used a stack of books,
or I'll sometimes take a
box and turn upside down
and set it there.
I do use a mixed standing-seated desk,
I'll talk about that in a few minutes.
There are a number of different
ways that you could do this,
you could wall mount a monitor.
I think many people are
working with laptops,
it's a little bit harder
to do that with a laptop,
some people though will
configure a second screen.
You have to decide what's
right for you in your budget.
But again, in addition to
having a brightly lit room,
to be able to focus and
attend to whatever it is
you're working on, you
want to have that screen
positioned high in your
visual environment.
Now you wouldn't want it
on the ceiling necessarily,
I know that would be pretty cool,
but you do want it above you.
Now, there are a couple solutions
to this that don't involve
a wall mount or stacking books or boxes.
For instance, you could
be one of those people
that likes to lie in bed or on the sofa
and get your screen up above you
by putting pillows on your knees.
I used to actually do a
lot of my writing and work
in the middle of the night,
I don't do this anymore
and I don't recommend it, but I used to do
a lot of work from bed.
Now I no longer bring electronics
for work into the bedroom.
I just really try and keep
the bedroom for sleeping
or whatever else.
But in terms of lying down on the couch,
it is somewhat easier to get
that screen up above you,
you can kind of slide underneath
that screen and get typing,
but there's a problem with that.
And we'll talk about this a
little bit more in a moment,
but it turns out that your posture,
literally the position of
your body relative to gravity,
also has important implications
for how alert you are.
So ideally you would
be standing or seated.
I would say the ideal would be standing,
second best will be seated
and your screen will be
either directly in front of
you or slightly above you.
Or if you wanted to get really fancy,
you could create a situation
where it was above you
and slightly tilted toward
you so that you actually
had to maintain kind
of proper neck posture.
This accomplishes a number of things.
In addition to making you more alert,
you also get away from
the so-called text neck.
You know, people are starting to look more
like C's nowadays, the
shape of the letter C
because we're constantly looking down.
I do every once in a while,
see somebody who's texting
in public with it at eye level,
it always looks a little odd
that they're doing that, but
I always admire their posture
at the same time, so we
shouldn't give them a hard time.
So this is another feature
that you can arrange
into your physical workspace.
Again, whether or not you're
seated or you're standing
throughout the day, try and
get that screen elevated.
Now with reference to posture,
there are beautiful data
illustrating that when we are standing up,
those same neurons in our brainstem,
locus coeruleus neurons,
which release I should mention
things like norepinephrin and epinephrin,
those neurons become active
when we are standing.
They become even more active
when we are ambulatory,
when we are moving and we
will talk about treadmilling
and cycling at your desk and
so forth in a little bit.
But when you sit, they
become a little less active
and when you lie down and
indeed, any time that you start
to get your feet up above your waist
or your head tilted back,
those neurons fire less
and neurons in your brain
that are involved in calming,
and indeed putting you to sleep,
start increasing their level of firing.
It's a really beautiful system.
So beautiful, in fact,
that there are studies
that show that as you adjust
the angle of the body back,
you actually get a sort
of dose-dependent increase
in sleepiness and calmness
and a dose-dependent
decrease in alertness.
And so, as we were all
told to sit up straight
or even better, just stand up straight,
and now I'm also telling
you to get that visual thing
that you're attending
to, screen or otherwise,
up in front of you, or ideally above you,
those things combine to
generate maximum alertness.
So you can think about
how you might work this
into various aspects of
your homework environment
or office work environment.
But as I describe this, many
of you are probably thinking
what I'm thinking, which
is, gosh, most of what we do
is in complete opposite direction
to all of this neurobiologically
grounded advice.
Most of us are looking down
at our laptop while seated,
or we are lying down, which is
going to make us more sleepy,
or we are positioning our
computers in front of us,
but we really aren't an
environment that's bright enough
and so on and so forth.
So as you can tell, we're
starting to layer in
the various things that you can do,
first brightness in the room,
second, get that screen up
and try and put yourself
into a posture for work
that lends itself or promotes alertness
if indeed, you want to
be alert for that work.
If your goal is to take a
nap, get your feet elevated
about 10 to 15 degrees above your head,
maybe put a pillow underneath
it, lie down and take a nap,
but that's not what we're
talking about today,
we're talking about
workspace optimization.
And I suppose you could also
exploit that all-nighter trick
that I talked about earlier,
I actually did this,
when I was an undergraduate,
I was a little bit
masochistic in this way.
I would drink coffee and
water at fairly high volume.
I wasn't forced drinking
or anything like that,
but I actually wouldn't
allow myself to get up
and use the bathroom except on a timer.
So I think the longest ever
went was three and a half hours.
It was kind of excruciating,
I actually don't think
that's necessarily a
healthy advice, but again,
you can use slight, I mentioned
slight over consumption
of fluids in order to generate alertness.
That was just me really trying
to get as much work done
as I could, I had a very,
very demanding class schedule
and it was just the only way
that I could get work done.
If I was getting up every few
minutes, use the restroom,
I found it hard to re-engage in that work
and maintain focus,
which is what I just want
to briefly mention now.
I talked about this in
the episode on focus,
but one thing that is
completely unreasonable
and that you should
never ask yourself to do
is to sit down or stand
up and immediately focus
on something, unless you're stressed
about what you're looking at,
or you're very, very excited by it.
If you're very stressed about
some sort of information
or a deadline, or you're very,
very excited about something,
you'll find that you can focus instantly
just within a moment.
And that's because of the
deployment of neurochemicals
like dopamine and norepinephrine
that bring about our levels of alertness.
However, most of us, including myself,
will go to begin to work out
and we'll find that our mind
doesn't quite engage at the
level of depth and focus
that we would like right off the bat.
I've timed this and other
studies have timed this
in a more rigorous way, mine
is just what we call anecdata,
but so I've timed it for myself,
but there are studies
that have looked at this.
And the data point to the fact
that even at our most
heightened levels of focus,
most people can only maintain
focus before switching tasks
for about three minutes,
which is depressingly
short period of time.
However, you can extend
that period of time,
and I've talked about that
in the episode on focus,
but more importantly, when you
sit down to start a work about
of any kind, any kind
expect that it would take
about six minutes for you to
engage these neural circuits,
you wouldn't expect yourself
to walk into the gym
and do a PR lift or start
running and do your best sprint,
or just head out the door
without warming up at all.
A little walk jog at first,
or a few warm up sets,
I mean, we expect that,
we are not surprised
that we need that.
And yet we sort of expect
that our brain should be able
to lock on and do work in a
very focused way immediately.
And that's just a ridiculous assumption,
it's an unfair assumption, I should say.
So assume that it will take
about six minutes to engage
in your work about and that
those neurochemical systems
will take some time to rev up and engage.
The other things that I'm
describing about lighting
and screen positioning and posture,
those will also help maximize your focus
and will limit that ramp
up time into a focus state.
And I think what you'll
find is that as you maximize
your workspace, the time the latency,
as we say to get into that
focus will start to shorten.
It will especially start
to shorten if you use tools
to limit distraction, we
will talk about distraction,
but things like Freedom, which is an app,
a free app that allows
you to lock yourself
out of the internet or turning
off your phone for instance.
But even if you're doing work
on your phone or that involves
your phone or the internet, as many of us
including myself do, expect
there to be a ramp up time
for you to focus.
There's another aspect of our vision
that's absolutely critical
for optimizing our workspace.
And that has to do with this
really interesting feature
of our visual pathways in that
it has two major channels.
Those two major channels have names,
although you don't have
to remember the names.
The first one is the so-called
parvocellular channel,
which is involved in looking
at things at specific points
in space and at high resolution or detail.
And then there's the so-called
magnocellular channel,
that's involved in looking
at big swaths of visual space
and at lower resolution.
So you can think of the
parvocellular system
as kind of a high pixel density,
think about your most modern smartphone,
the recent smartphone with
the best, best camera.
And think about the magnocellular system
as being lower resolution,
kind of an older smartphone,
lower pixels, et cetera.
You might ask, why would you want a system
that's low resolution.
Well, the low resolution
system is better at things
like detecting motion
and not so much at detail
and vice versa.
Now, again, you don't have
to remember the names,
what you do have to remember, however,
is that you're going to
create the maximum amount
of alertness in your system.
The maximum amount of ability
to focus when your system
is in that parvocellular mode,
when you're bringing your
eyes to a common point,
what we call a vergence eye
movement, V-E-R-G-E-N-C-E.
I've said this before on the
podcast, and people said,
virgin eye movement, no,
vergence eye movement.
As in convergence, bringing your eyes
to a single point in space,
will create a narrower aperture
of a visual window,
meaning your visual world
actually shrinks at least perceptually.
Whereas when you relax your
eyes and dilate your gaze,
you can do this now by
whatever environment you're in,
trying and see without moving
your head off to the side,
above, below you, as broadly as possible,
maybe can dilate your gaze
so much that you can see
yourself, your body in
that visual environment.
You'll notice that your
resolution of vision
isn't nearly as high as when you do
that vergence eye movement.
Vergence eye movements
are incredibly powerful
for creating heightened
states of alertness and focus.
And indeed they create
heightened states of cognition,
of thinking, and that's because your brain
follows your vision in terms of focus.
When we say I can't focus,
what we often are experiencing
is an ability, and inability, excuse me,
to not focus visually.
Whereas when we are in
a very focused state,
we are in a state often
where we can focus visually.
Now we can also do this
with our auditory system
or to touch et cetera, but
right now we're just talking
about the visual system.
Now, in terms of workspace optimization,
what this means is we never
really want to be looking
at a square or rectangle
or target area for our work
that is too far beyond our ears.
How far is too far?
Really, you want to try
and keep the blinders on,
or I should say the invisible blinders
so that whatever you're looking at falls
within the region of visual
space in front of you,
that is present if you
were to cup your hands
and put them right next to your eyes.
Now this is a rough estimation,
but I'm doing this now,
for those of you that
are watching on YouTube,
I'm doing this now, I'm trying
to simulate like a horse
with blinders on, for those
of you who are listening,
just imagine me looking
silly with my hands
cupped near my eyes.
But if we are to, for
instance, look at a screen
that's very, very big and
we're too close to it,
or even if we're standing back from it,
it's going to be hard for
us to attend to everything
within that screen space.
So this is actually support
for the idea of using a phone
or a tablet or a laptop.
My laptop is about 15 inches in diameter,
I think is the one that I
have, some are 13, some are 17.
Some of you like to use big monitors,
make sure that whatever it
is that you're looking at,
if you want to remain focused,
it doesn't extend too far
beyond where your eyes are,
the size of your head that is,
so just think blinders on a horse.
And actually that's the reason
they put blinders on a horse
so that they're not looking
off into the periphery.
Horses, unlike humans don't
have the same shaped pupil,
they don't have a visual system
that's organized in quite the same way,
they mostly see in Panorama,
in magnocellular vision.
And so those blinders are designed
to keep their visual focus straight ahead,
so they physically restrict it.
Now, some people will
actually go to lengths
to further restrict their visual focus.
They will do things
like putting on a hoodie
or wearing a hat for instance,
to restrict their visual window.
And indeed that works quite well,
but as we'll talk about in a moment
when you really restrict
your visual window,
down to a very, very narrow
portion of visual space,
that actually changes
the types of information
that you are best at processing.
And we'll talk about that
in terms of something
that's called the cathedral
effect in a few moments,
but for now here's the principle,
make sure that whatever you're looking at
is directly in front of
you and doesn't extend
too far out to the side.
Once you get out to say six
or 12 or certainly 18 inches
on side of your eyes, you
are dilating your gaze
by definition, you're dilating your gaze,
it's completely subconscious,
and it becomes very hard
to maintain attention.
Now, the caveat to this is
that if you are going to look
at a narrow space, a narrow
window for any period of time,
whether or not it's a book or a laptop
or a tablet or a phone,
those vergence eye movements
not only create alertness,
but they also require energy.
And they also can fatigue the
eyes because there's a process
called accommodation whereby
the shape of your eye
literally has to change
so that the lens can move
so that you can focus at that location.
Accommodation's an incredible process,
but it is as demanding
one, and that's the reason
that your eyes get tired
when you focus on something
for too long.
So here's a principle extracted
from the ophthalmology
and neuroscience literature
that you can adopt.
For every 45 minutes in which
you are focusing on something
like a phone or a tablet or
a book page or your computer,
you want to get into
magnocellular panoramic vision
for at least five minutes.
And the way that I suggest
to do this is actually
to take a walk, ideally outside.
We're going to talk about
ambulation, about movement
and about how that can maintain alertness
throughout the day.
So for every 45 minutes or
so, try and get five minutes
of relaxing your eyes.
This is something that's not often done,
especially in today's homeschooling
and where kids are going to school by Zoom
and adults are working by Zoom,
this is a serious problem.
People are getting eye fatigue,
they're getting headaches.
Indeed, some people are getting migraines,
they're having all sorts
of issues, neck pain.
Much of that, if not all
of that, in some cases
can be alleviated by this 45 to five rule.
For every 45 minutes of
focused work that you do,
get five minutes where you get outside,
or if you have to be indoors
where you can dilate your gaze.
Now some of you may be saying,
well, that spits in the
face of your 90 minute rule.
You've told us before that we
should focus for 90 minutes.
I would still want you to take breaks
within those 90 minutes, if
you're looking at a narrow piece
of visual world, meaning at a
phone or a laptop or so forth,
and again, the best way to do
this would be to go outside,
just relax your eyes, look
off into the distance.
Looking at a horizon will
automatically trigger
this panoramic gaze, which
is very relaxing to the eyes
and will allow you to go back
into a focused work about.
The one thing you
absolutely do not want to do
is to go outside and check your phone,
because if you're outside
checking your phone
or you're taking a break
and checking your phone,
you're still in that
vergence eye movement.
So this is very, very important
because vergence eye movements
increase focus and attention,
and you can exploit that to increase focus
and attention when you want
to, but you absolutely need
to relax the system,
again for every 45 minutes
in which you've been in that focused mode,
you want to get at least five
minutes of panoramic vision.
If you can take a 15
minute walk, even better.
Next, I'd like to talk about an aspect
of workspace optimization
that can actually bias
whether or not our
brain and nervous system
are better suited for
detailed analytic work
or more abstract work.
In fact, there's a way
that you can arrange
your work environment, or
I should say there's a way
that you can place yourself
into certain environments
that will allow abstract
thinking, creative thinking,
and indeed expansive thinking to emerge.
There are other environments
that you can put yourself in
that will make your brain shift
towards more analytic work,
toward more detailed and
precise types of work.
Now, I just briefly want to
mention something that was covered
again on the Habits episode
that I did a few weeks ago,
but again, you don't
need to see that episode
in order to digest this information.
It goes back to this issue of three phases
within the circadian 24 hour cycle.
Phase one, which as I mentioned
is about zero to eight hours
after waking, phase two, nine
to 16 hours after waking,
and phase three 17 to
24 hours after waking.
Phase one, being ideal
for analytic precise,
detailed types of work,
phase two, better suited
for most people for creative,
kind of abstract thinking,
expansive thinking,
brainstorming, et cetera.
There are some exceptions to
that, but most people follow
that pattern because of the
different neuromodulators
and hormones and so
forth that are released
into the brain and body
at those different phases.
What I'm about to tell you
is a way in which you can use
your physical environment
to further shift your brain
and nervous system into a
mode that's either prime
for analytic or abstract
and creative thinking.
What I'm about to describe is
called the cathedral effect.
The cathedral effect has
been discussed well really,
for many, many decades,
maybe even hundreds of years,
but formally has been
discussed since the early 2000s
in which it seemed that people who were
in high ceilinged environments,
hence the phrase cathedral,
would shift their thinking and
their ideas to more abstract
and creative lofty type thinking.
So literally higher
ceiling, loftier thinking,
higher aspirations that this was observed
in terms of the language that they use,
but also the sorts of ideas
that they would generate.
And conversely, that people that were
in lower ceilinged environments
would be more oriented
toward using a language
that was more restricted,
literally more detailed,
analytic about things
in their immediate space.
Now this seems kind of
wild on the one hand,
but actually if we go
back to our understanding
of the neurobiology of the visual system
and the way that our
brain and body is evolved
in different environments, it
actually makes a lot of sense.
We don't have time to
go into a long lecture
about evolutionary neurobiology,
but we have to remember
that our nervous system
has a number of features
that are adapted to
different environments.
And indeed, we are able to
go from big open prairies
or mountaintops or large
cathedrals or concert halls
into small environments and
everything scales with it.
When we're outdoors in
a big, expensive space,
our vision tends to go long,
we tend to be in panoramic,
magnocellular vision.
Our hearing tends to extend long,
even if we're having a
conversation with somebody,
we tend to also be attending somewhat
to the screech of hawks
off in the distance
or to the rush of a river.
Whereas when we were in
small spaces, everything,
our vision, our hearing, and indeed
even our physical movements
become more restrained.
Even if we can still extend our
hands out as far as we want.
What do I mean by that?
Let's say you're in an elevator,
that's a small space compared
to outside on a field.
This has been measured
over and over again.
The size or the amplitude of
people's spontaneous movements
actually scales down in
smaller environments,
even if they aren't completely
restricted from extending
their limbs all the way,
whereas when we are outdoors,
we feel a natural impulse
to move further away
from our body, our torso with our limbs,
this just feels like more
appropriate behavior.
And when I say appropriate,
I don't mean in any kind of
social context necessarily.
There's actually a reason
for this, the visual system
and the so-called vestibular motor system
are intimately linked.
And I can just tell you briefly one way
in which you can test
this and observe this
and even use this, it's a little off topic
from today's episode, but let's say
you have a certain amount of flexibility.
You can extend your arms off like wings
is what I'm doing for those
of you that are listening,
not watching off to your
side with arms straight,
and you reach a maximum
positioning of flexibility.
You can do a quick experiment
where you sit still,
you would bring your arms in for a moment.
You can put them on
your knees, if you like,
or in front of you, and
you can move your eyes
very far off into the
periphery of your visual field.
So you actually, I'm going to do this now.
It looks kind of silly, but moving my eyes
without moving my head
off into the periphery,
all the way to the right,
then all the way to the left,
all the way up all the way down,
but especially all the way to the left,
almost looking over my shoulder
without turning my head
all the way to my right.
And you will find that you
actually can extend your arms
further back subsequent to that.
And that's not magic, it
has to do with the ways
in which your cerebellum,
which actually means mini brain
and your eyes, your visual
system are connected,
and the way in which
your cerebellum controls
some of the spindles and other aspects
of the neuromuscular architecture
of your nervous system,
'cause your nerves control your muscles
and allow those muscles
to move further out.
So for those of you that lack flexibility,
you can actually explore
your visual system for this.
Now that's again, a bit of a
tangent, but it's a fun one
that relates back to this
so-called cathedral effect.
The cathedral effect is a
way in which our thinking
becomes more restricted
and restrained in tighter,
smaller, more confined
visual environments.
Or if the ceiling is higher,
we are in expansive space
with a lot of distance
above us or space above us
and out to the sides,
maybe even out on a field,
our thinking goes into
these more broad abstract
and kind of loftier future
thinking in particular.
This has actually been measured.
There's a really nice paper,
I will post a link to this.
The authors are Joan Meyers-Levy and Rui,
and then in parentheses Juliet Zhu,
I'm going to assume
that they go by Juliet.
The title of the paper is "The
Influence of Ceiling Height:
"The Effect of Priming
"on the Type of Processing People Use."
And I won't go into all the details
of this paper, but what's
really cool about this paper
is they looked with
very rigorous statistics
and they have a fair number of subjects
and everything about this
paper looks solid to me.
The difference in cognitive processing,
and abstract thinking and
detailed analytic work
that people are able to
perform in environments
that have a 10 foot ceiling
versus an eight foot ceiling,
which is not that much of a difference,
there's just two foot difference there.
And what they found
were significant effects
whereby high ceilings, activate concepts
related to abstraction,
whereas low ceilings prime
confinement related
concepts, but, or promote
the kind of detailed thinking
that lends itself well
to sort of spreadsheet type
work or accounting type work.
Whereas abstract creative
work was supported
by these higher ceilings.
And the way they analyze
this was really interesting.
Again, we don't have time
to go into all the details,
but they ask people to
sort of generate word sets
of related to particular
topics like sports.
And so people will talk
about soccer, football,
baseball, golf, et cetera,
and talk about some of the
equipment and other things.
And then they had a kind of a challenge,
a cognitive challenge
whereby people had to link
different concepts along
different dimensions
so that you depart from
the dimension of sport
and you start thinking about
sports that involve teams
or sports that involve a ball, et cetera.
And so in the same conditions you can,
except for the fact that the
ceiling height is different
eight feet or 10 feet, what one finds
is that the kinds of language
and the kinds of associations
that people start to create
are vastly different.
And there're actually two
experiments in this study,
you're welcome to go look at it,
so it wasn't just about sports,
there were some other things
that were analyzed as well.
And in the references of this paper,
it also points to other examples
of the cathedral effect,
which I find very interesting
because as a vision scientist
and someone who spends
his life thinking about
and indeed talking about
the nervous system,
we know that our cognition
follows our vision.
For low vision or blind
people will follow mostly
their hearing and to
some extent their touch.
But for most people who are sighted,
as most people are cited,
our cognition follows
our visual environment.
So what does this mean for
workspace optimization?
Well, most of us have a fixed
ceiling level in our home,
but you might have rooms in
which the ceiling is higher
and rooms in which the ceiling is lower.
If that were the case, I
recommend if you want to do
creative work during phase
two, the nine to 16 hours
of your circadian cycle,
nine to 16 hours after waking
that is, that you do that
in the high ceiling room,
or maybe even outdoors out
on a deck or on a patio.
Cause the highest ceiling
of courses is the sky.
Whereas if you're going to
do detailed analytic work
I would suggest doing that
during phase one of the day.
But even if you're going
to do it during phase two
of the day, for whatever
reason, scheduling
or other sorts of
constraints that you do that
in the lower ceiling environment.
Now, if you are interested in controlling
the height of your visual world,
but you don't have control
over the ceiling height of the
environment that you're in,
there's another way to do that.
And I used to observe this in the cafes,
in and around Stanford, and the Bay area
where you would see somebody
who, despite the weather
would be in a hoodie,
maybe with a baseball cap
or other form of hat
or some sort of blinder
above their eyebrows, which
is actually another way
of just lowering the ceiling
height very, very low
and restricting your visual field.
Not unlike blinders that
we talked about before
that one would put on a horse
or one would put on themselves
by restricting their visual angle of focus
to directly in front of
them, but not too far out
beyond the sides of their head.
So these cathedral effects,
I think can be leveraged
toward doing particular
types of work best.
And again, the lower the ceiling
or the lower your visual environment,
the more that one tends to do
where I should say performs
detailed analytic work accurately.
And the more that one's
thinking is oriented
towards detailed sort of
correct answer type work.
Whereas when the ceiling is
higher or there's no ceiling,
the more that the brain and
the rest of the processing
that we call cognitive processing,
is related to abstract
reasoning, brainstorming,
and indeed can pull from broader
swaths of memory resources,
because really what abstract reasoning is,
is it's taking the existing
elements and maneuvering them,
arranging them into novel ways.
So you can think about
like notes on a piano,
playing a particular
song, learning scales,
that's very analytic.
There's a correct answer that
you're trying to arrive at
or generate, whereas writing
music or writing poetry
or generating new material of any kind,
involves taking existing elements, right?
You're not going to use
words that you don't have
committed to your memory or
that you're not aware of,
and arranging them in novel ways.
So I think the cathedral
effect can be leveraged.
And again, you don't need to
move into a different home
or build a slanted roof and
work at one side of the room
at one part of the day and
the other side of the room
at the other, although if that's
the way you want to swing it,
that's great, most of us
don't have that flexibility,
but it's very clear that
the height of the ceiling
of the visual environment that we're in,
has a profound effect on the
types of cognitive processes
that we are able to engage.
Now, I'd like to shift our attention
to the auditory environment
or the noise in the room
or the music in the room or the music
or noise in the headphones,
because it turns out
that there is a lot of quality
scientific data out there
that speaks to whether or not
listening to particular sounds
can enhance our cognition.
And indeed the answer is yes,
but there are very particular
types of things to listen to
under very particular types of conditions
that allow one to do that.
First off, I want to say
that people vary tremendously
in the extent to which they can tolerate
background noise for work.
In fact, individuals will
vary tremendously from one day
to the next, or even within the same day
in the extent to which they
can tolerate background noise.
I've experienced this
myself, there been times
in which I've been working at home
and I felt like for whatever reason,
I just could not engage in focus.
And what worked to
generate more focus for me
was to go to a cafe or to a library
or someplace where there's
actually more commotion,
more people moving about,
maybe even more noise,
maybe even music in the room.
And we have to all be in
touch with when we want
more background noise, or when we want
less background noise, there
is no hard and fast rule.
If you look across the literature
for studies that involve
complete silence or white noise
or binaural beats, or music
or classical music or rock and roll,
you can find results to
support any type of environment
as being more beneficial.
However, as we'll talk about in a moment,
there are a few types of
environments to really avoid
and a few types of sounds
that really can enhance
the cognition and your ability to focus
in your workspace
environment across the board,
that really seemed to work for all people.
Let's talk about
background noise to avoid.
And here we're talking about
background noise to avoid
because it actually can cause
some pretty severe deficits in cognition.
There's a paper first author,
Jordan Love, cool name,
last author Alexander Francis.
The, the title of the paper has to do
with "Psychophysiological
responses to potentially annoying
"heating, ventilation and
air conditioning noise
"during mentally demanding
work," which is a mouthful.
But basically what this paper
identifies is a large dataset
in which workplace and
environmental noise,
mostly the humming of air
conditioners that's very loud
or the humming of heaters,
that's very loud and ongoing,
just incessant doesn't let
up, can really increase
mental fatigue and can vastly decrease
cognitive performance. And if
you're interested in looking
at the cognitive performance
data that authors
are Banbury & Berry 2005,
that paper is the one
that supports the fact that
cognitive performance is worse
when there's just the
hum of an air conditioner
in the background or the hum of a heater
and otherwise complete silence.
There's also evidence which
I discussed on the episode
about hearing, which is
that in young children,
white noise can cause some impairments
in the development of the auditory system.
Now I don't want parents to
freak out and if you're exposed
to white noise, as it as
a sleep aid as a child,
which I know many of you
were, don't freak out,
but it turns out that white
noise, especially if it's loud,
white noise can cause some
disruption in the auditory maps,
the representation of
different frequencies of sound
in the brain that can lead
to some deficits in auditory
and even language processing.
So we really have to be careful
about long-term exposure,
extended exposure to white noise,
or kind of an air conditioning noise
that's really at a high level.
I wouldn't worry if it's in
the background and shutting off
and turning on again, as the
thermostat kicks off and on,
but really try and avoid
work in loud fan filled
or ventilation generating or
heat generating environments,
because it really can cause damage
to the auditory system
long-term and as we described,
it can impair cognitive performance
and overall increase fatigue.
I think we've all experienced
that when you're in a room
and there's some ongoing background noise
and all of a sudden it
stops and you just feel
this enormous relief [sighs].
And the reason for this is
that our auditory system
has a parallel to our visual system.
In our visual system, that
light entering the eyes
triggers the activation
of those melanopsin cells,
which triggers activation
of the hypothalamus,
a particular area of the hypothalamus,
which generates alertness,
generates the release,
even of cortisol, a stress hormone.
In the auditory system,
when there's ongoing sound,
your auditory system hears that,
even if you're not paying attention to it,
if you're paying attention
to something else,
it's still registers.
Those little hair cells, as
they're called in your inner ear
are fluttering, the eardrum is beating
and in concert to that sound frequency.
And there's a brainstem mechanism
that generates alertness
and a kind of vigilant.
So when you have a sound that's
ongoing in the background,
it shuts off, all of a sudden
you experienced that peace,
which is the turning off
of those brainstem circuits
that are associated with
vigilance, the locus coeruleus,
which we talked about earlier,
which release epinephrin
and norepinephrine and
generate the heightened state
of alertness in your brain and body,
those neurons then can turn off
and you experience that as relaxation.
So does that mean that we
shouldn't listen to white noise
or pink noise or brown
noise while we're working?
Certainly a lot of people do.
In fact, if you want to
know what white noise,
pink noise and brown noise are,
they're just different constellations
of auditory frequencies
that are played together.
Most of us think of white noise
as the [shushing] on a screen,
all the black and white
pixels going all around,
like they call it visual
snow, but pink noise
has certain sound
frequencies, notched out,
taken out, brown noise has others.
It has different frequencies
that are included
at higher amplitude, et cetera.
You can look this stuff up on YouTube,
if you want, you to just put brown noise.
None of it sounds terrific,
it doesn't sound like music.
It's literally just
noise, mixed frequencies
in no particular arrangement.
There is some evidence
that playing white noise
in the background or on
headphones or pink noise
or brown noise can facilitate cognition,
but it's mainly through an increase
in this overall alertness as a consequence
of areas like locus coeruleus
and other brainstem areas
that are associated with autonomic arousal
from that noise.
So it's a lot like the
air conditioner effect.
And I think done in a restricted way,
meaning not for hours and
hours, but maybe if your focus
is waning and you're having
a hard time engaging in work,
you might put on some
brown noise or white noise
or pink noise and work that
way for 45 minutes or so
before you go to your
panoramic vision walk
and get some sunlight,
that should be fine.
There's really no reason
to suspect, however,
that those particular patterns of noise
are going to optimize
particular mental functions.
So what I'd like to turn to
next are particular patterns
of sounds that indeed have been shown
in peer-reviewed studies
to optimize certain types
of mental processing, because
you can incorporate these
into your optimized workspace environment,
through headphones or through speakers,
whatever mechanism that you want,
in order to get more out
of your work efforts.
If you were to search for apps
or go online and try and find
sounds that can improve thinking
or change your emotions.
You're generally going
to find three types.
One are called isochronic tones,
these are tones usually
of a common frequency.
So it might be a beep and
then a pause, and then beep
of the same frequency, and then beep,
forgive my terrible beeping.
I don't know what good
beeping would sound like,
but contrast isochronic
tones with monaural beats.
Monaural beats would be repetitive,
almost percussive like beats
delivered to just one ear,
[vocalizing], this kind of thing.
You can find apps that can
deliver monaural beats,
you can find also apps that deliver
so-called binaural beats.
You can also find YouTube
scripts or channels
that will deliver binaural beats.
Binaural beats as the name suggests,
are beats delivered to the two ears,
one pattern of kind of
percussive beat to one ear
and a different pattern,
or at least a pattern
that's out of phase,
that's not synchronized,
delivered to the other ear.
So on one ear you hear, [vocalizing]
and in the other ear,
you've got [vocalizing].
And what happens is because of the way
that the auditory system
converges in the brainstem
and generates what are called
interaural time differences,
I'll explain what that means in a moment,
interaural time
differences, the difference
between the two patterns
of beats that are heard
by each of the two different
ears, leads to a third pattern
that the brain entrains
to, and kind of maps onto
and generates particular
types of brainwaves.
So without going into a lot of detail,
interaural time differences are the ways
in which if you were to hear
something off to your right,
like I just snapped my
finger just to the right
of my right ear, that a
signal arrives in my right ear
before that's sound signal,
those sound waves arrive
in my left ear.
So there's an interaural
between ears, time difference.
And there's a brainstem area
in which signals from one ear
and signals from the other ear converge,
and there's literally a math
done by your nervous system
that says this signal arrived
before the other signal.
And the difference between those signals
is the interaural time difference.
So if I were to snap my
fingers on both sides
on my left and on my right
side of the exact same time,
and they arrive at the same time,
the interaural time difference is zero.
Whereas if one goes first on
the right and then the left,
I'm terrible at snapping on
the left, it's a weak snap,
but it was there, then there's a delay
and the interaural time
difference has a particular value.
Okay, you get it, it's
almost ridiculously simple.
Binaural beats have been generated in ways
that create a particular pattern
of interaural time
differences that then cascades
up to the rest of the brain
and puts the forebrain
and other areas of the brain
that are involved in cognition
and action into a particular rhythm.
And some of the rhythms or
waves of brain activity are ones
that you may have heard
of, things like alpha waves
or theta waves or gamma waves.
Now I don't like to get too attached
to particular brain waves as excellent
for particular kinds of thinking.
This is something that was really popular
in the 90s and 2000s, when ways
of measuring brain activity,
noninvasively with
electrodes on the outside,
enabled people to identify
the indeed alpha brain waves
are associated with alertness states.
And some are other brainwaves
that are kind of larger amplitudes,
slow waves like delta waves are associated
with kind of sleepiness or
relaxation, but in general,
the way that the brain works
is that different brain waves
are generated in different
structures at different times.
And those combine to give us a
sense of happiness or give us
a sense of focus or give
us a sense of creativity.
Nonetheless, if you look
across the board at the studies
of binaural beats and you ask
what sorts of binaural beats
appear to be useful for people to enhance
their brain function for
particular kinds of tasks,
we arrive at some very
interesting answers.
So we'll review what those are now.
The frequency of binaural beats
that appears to bring about
improved cognitive functioning
at the level of memory,
improved reaction times
and improved verbal recall,
seems to be 40 Hertz.
Now, is it exactly 40 Hertz?
We don't know, but if one wants to look up
a great reference on this,
they reference Colzato,
C-O-L-Z-A-T-O et al 2017
describes and here, I'm quoting,
so this is a direct quote.
"The present findings are in line
"with those of a recent
study, which also found
"faster reaction times in participants
"that listen to binaural
beats at 40 Hertz."
And you can find many examples
of this in the literature
where binaural beats have about 40 Hertz
or exactly 40 Hertz, in some cases,
somehow brought the brain into
a state that made it optimal
for learning, for memory and
for certain types of recall,
including verbal recall,
math learning, et cetera.
So for those of you that are
interested in binaural beats,
there are a number of free apps out there.
I'm not going to recommend
any in particular,
just have to search for one
that you happen to like.
One thing that you will find
is that many of those apps
super-imposed binaural beats
onto raindrops or ocean sounds
or that rather they superimpose
ocean sounds and raindrops
onto the binaural beats,
that does not appear
to be as effective as pure binaural beats.
There has been an exploration
of lower frequency binaural beats.
So for instance, seven Hertz,
which is theta binaural beats
done for 30 minutes with
an overlay of rain sound
or rain sounds only that's been analyzed
and believe it or not, that
showed immediate recall memory
was significantly decreased.
So that's a negative effect
of binaural beats on memory.
So the idea that binaural
beats are just great for us
across the board, I think is wrong.
It does appear that the higher
frequency binaural beats
as one moves up toward 40 Hertz
are going to be the most beneficial.
There are instances in which for instance,
15 Hertz binaural beats
increased response accuracy
on a spatial verbal memory task.
This is a complicated working memory task.
Working memory is the kind of memory
of remembering a phone number.
So if I say for instance, 4932931,
and you have to remember that number,
keeping it online is what
we call your working memory.
It's likely that you would forget that
two or three days later.
You can get improvements in working memory
with 15 Hertz binaural beats,
whereas the other control conditions,
five Hertz and 10 Hertz binaural beats,
all decreased accuracy of working memory.
However, when I looked at the literature
and I examined a number
of different studies,
what I always seem to come
back to was that 40 Hertz or so
plus or minus five Hertz
seemed to be optimal
for generating improvements in cognition,
in math performance, and
even in various types
of memory recall, and even
in musical performance.
You might wonder, well, how can people do
musical performance, they're
listening to binaural beats.
Here's another surprise,
many of the studies
that I looked at didn't
have people listening
to binaural beats while
they were doing the tasks,
the memory task, or the
music learning, et cetera,
they would do it
beforehand for 30 minutes.
There were instances in
which people were listening
to binaural beats during the task.
But if you decide to
employ binaural beats,
I recommend this 40 Hertz
as a great place to start.
I don't recommend doing it
for all of your work bouts.
I think there's a good reason to believe
that you can attenuate to it.
But if you are going to try
it, you might try it both ways.
You might try listening to binaural beats
for about 30 minutes
while doing something else
and then maybe eating lunch
or something of that sort,
or taking a walk and then
going into the work about.
Because remember the moment
that you start listening
to these binaural beats, the
brain doesn't immediately
switch into a particular
pattern of oscillation
or brain waves, it takes some time.
Neural circuits, again,
take time to engage.
The only neural circuits that
are going to engage instantly
are going be the ones that are
of a sort of reflexive sort,
like you step on a sharp object
and you have to retract your limb,
or you suddenly are stressed
by a distressing text message,
or you're suddenly delighted
about a delightful text message.
But when it comes to shifting
your whole brain state
toward optimizing work, it
takes a little bit of time.
So again, 40 Hertz binaural
beats, many, many apps,
many YouTube scripts out
there, probably other resources
for binaural beats, hopefully zero cost,
so you can access those without any need
to shell out any money.
If you find one that
you particularly like,
maybe put in the comment section,
so other people can find it,
YouTube would be the
best place to do that.
Feel free to put a link
or just a description,
that will be wonderful.
And again, you don't need
to listen to binaural beats
at the exact same time
that you're doing the work,
although that could also
enhance your productivity.
Some of you out there might be craving
a little bit more mechanism
by which binaural beats
can influence things like
focus or reduced reaction time.
This has actually been explored,
this 40 Hertz binaural beats
pattern seems to have an effect
on what's called striatal dopamine.
We have dopamine as a
neuromodulator of course,
involved in many things in motivation,
it's actually involved in
adaptation to light in the retina.
Something that most people don't know,
but it's involved in
movement, which is why people
with Parkinson's who have a
depletion of dopamine neurons
actually have movement deficits and so on.
But striatal dopamine is closely related
to motivation and focus.
And 40 Hertz binaural
beats appears to increase
striatal dopamine release.
And this has actually
been measured indirectly
by what we call spontaneous blink rate.
Now I've been accused on
various Instagram posts,
and even on this podcast
of being a non-blinker,
let's call it, or a minimal blinker.
And as an important aside,
there is no evidence whatsoever
that people that don't blink very much
are sociopaths or lie.
Also, you will hear that
people who blink a lot
are sociopaths and are lying.
There's absolutely no
evidence that blink frequency
correlates with anything except alertness.
Now longer blinks are
associated with less alertness.
As we get tired, we tend
to blink longer and longer
until we take the long
blink that is sleep.
I guess the long blink would be death,
but the longish blink would be sleep.
But it turns out that the more
firing of striatal dopamine
neurons that's occurring,
the more frequently we blink.
And so it is associated with a resetting
of our visual window, that's
what happens when we blink
and there's a whole
relationship between blinking
and time perception that we covered
in the episode on time perception.
But here's the bottom line
for sake of this discussion.
40 Hertz binaural beats
appears to increase
spontaneous blink rates
because it increases
dopamine transmission in the
brainstem and in the striatum
in several locations in fact.
And so the way in which
these binaural beats
set a rhythm in the brain,
recruits dopamine release.
That dopamine release
leads to heightened levels
of motivation and focus,
why motivation and focus?
Well, dopamine is actually the substrate
by which epinephrin is made.
Dopamine, the molecule is
actually converted into epinephrin
adrenaline and they work
together like close cousins,
dopamine and epinephrin in
order to put us on a path
of movement or if we are doing work,
of mental movement toward a goal.
So that's a little bit of
mechanistic meat to explain
at least part of the reason
why 40 Hertz binaural beats
can enhance our focus,
reduce our reaction times
and improve indeed learning and memory.
Next I'd like to talk
about the role of movement
in optimizing our workspace
and whether or not standing,
sitting, lying down, treadmilling
or even believe it or not,
cycling, can enhance our
work output and performance.
Before we do that, I want
to touch on two aspects
of optimizing workspace that
will come up at some point
in your work or school life.
Alas, there isn't a lot
of science around this,
but I think they are worth mentioning.
And I think I can offer
a little bit of advice
in terms of how to navigate these
in a way that would be beneficial to you.
The first one is interruptions.
If you go online and you ask
about how to avoid
interruptions, people will say,
okay, well, if you have kids
at home or even if you don't
or at work, you'll have a
light, like a recording light
with recording is on
we're, we're busy now,
or have a sign on the door that says
bother only in a case of emergency
or find to knock or don't knock at all.
I've used a different
policy throughout the years.
I am somebody who works
pretty hard to control my time
and focus, but of course,
as a laboratory director,
I have people coming by and
who want to talk about things.
And of course we have
phones and we have computers
and people's opportunity to reach us.
Interruptions really are deadly
to our ability to generate focus.
And it's not just about
the distraction that occurs
of say a minute or two
minutes or five minutes
when we were interrupted,
it's also about the additional time
to get those brain circuits to
re-engage to a mode of focus.
So it's really kind of a double whammy.
Now, none of us, including
myself want to be harsh
or cruel or shut off from the world
and oftentimes interruptions
bring incredible insights
and people are providing
support and very useful things
that are essential to my
workday and presumably
to your workday in school day as well.
But there's a simple method that I learned
from my graduate advisor
that works very, very well.
Again, no peer review data to support it,
this is just my experience,
but this is somebody
who had immense powers of focus,
had a very, very demanding life,
a long commute to children,
extensive laboratory, et cetera.
And what she would do was if I
came by and asked a question,
or if anyone came by and asked a question,
she would acknowledge their presence,
but would not shift her body toward them.
So she purposely did not
position her computer
facing the door, which I think
is a deadly or I should say,
deadly to focus a way of
positioning your workspace.
So her computer was facing the wall,
the door was perpendicular to that.
And I would come by and
I say, I have a question.
She would say yes, so she
would acknowledge my presence,
but she wouldn't actually
orient her body toward me,
which told me that this conversation
was not going to last very long.
And no matter how long I
stood there or what I asked,
she would never orient toward me,
which generally kept these
conversations very, very short.
We had other designated meetings
where we would be face-to-face.
The other approach, which I confess
colleagues of mine have used before,
not necessarily at Stanford,
but elsewhere is to simply say
no to everything that
somebody requests or comes by.
So if someone would knock on the door,
they would just shout no through the door,
or if someone said, can I
bother you for a second?
They would say, no, or if someone said,
I have something I want to tell
you, they would just say no.
And they would just continue doing this
until the person went away.
That was actually very effective,
these were some of the most
productive people I know,
not always the kindest, but
some of them were very kind.
The other approach that I've seen
and actually this is an approach
that was used by someone
who has been a guest on
The Huberman Lab Podcast,
someone who's immensely
productive was that he,
so I'm constraining who
this might be by saying he,
he actually, despite having the option
to have a very large
office, would place himself
in a workspace that was
literally a coat closet,
cleared out with a desk,
small lamp, completely dark.
So this violates everything
that I've talked about before
or prior to this, everything
about high ceilings,
bright light, et cetera, and would work,
still works underneath a desk lamp
in a completely dark
closet, minimal ventilation.
This is my definition of hell.
And yet is one of the most
productive people on the planet.
Also very, very hard to
find, I actually know
where his closet is, turns
out he has several of them
that he migrates from in
order to avoid distractions.
So I mentioned these as kind of extremes,
I think that most of us
exist on the other extreme.
And that's why I mentioned
it, which is that most of us
like some social engagement and a welcome,
or at least set our work environment
in a way that welcomes interruption
and we have to be very,
very careful about this.
Now in the digital realm,
I already mentioned
a few of the things that we
can do as practical tools
to limit interruptions.
One is use the program Freedom,
the other would be to
simply turn off the wifi.
If you do need to be
online and navigating,
you're doing research of any kind,
that's not going to be possible.
Turning off one's phone, I've at times,
put my phone on airplane
mode, if that didn't work,
I've locked it in a safe, I've done that,
I'd left in the car outside.
It all depends on one's
levels of self-discipline,
which as you probably know,
from your own experience,
tends to kind of wax and wane.
Sometimes we are better
at avoiding these
distractions than others.
So if you find yourself in
a place where it's very hard
to reduce those distractions,
you may need you to go
to more elaborate lanes.
I will say that a
graduate student in my lab
who was immensely productive and focused,
had the habit of coming in each day,
she would take her phone, I
don't know if she turned it on,
or off or not, and she would
just place it in a door,
excuse me, in a drawer
and would then go start doing experiments.
We do experiments all day at 10 courses,
engage in discussions
avidly with the rest of us,
and then would take her phone out
at the end of the day and leave.
And I don't think that
behavior was not correlated
with her immense productivity.
I think the ability to untether
ourselves from the phone
is going to be the way in which many of us
are either going to succeed or
fail in our various pursuits.
I'm somebody who engages on with the phone
on a regular basis throughout
the day for various reasons,
but I do try and have
large swaths of the day
in which it's either on airplane mode
or it's completely
physically separated from me.
When I'm in large swaths,
I might do every other hour
with the phone on airplane mode
or even a two or three hour
about where I just am simply
not engaged with the phone at all.
So is it better to sit
or is it better to stand
when doing work, at least as it relates
to focus and productivity?
And the answer is both.
There've been a number
of systematic studies
exploring what are called sit-stand desks.
So these are desks that
can be set to a height
that makes standing the best practice,
and then they can be lowered to a height
that makes sitting the best practice
or the easiest practice I should say.
And it turns out that just
sitting is terrible for us
and there's an enormous
number of studies out there
that have pointed the
fact that people who sit
for five or six or seven
hours a day doing work,
have all sorts of issues
related to sleep, neck pain,
cognition suffers, their number
of cardiovascular effects,
even digestion, there may even actually be
some almost pressure
effects on the pelvic floor
and things of that sort,
depending on the chairs
that one uses.
But that people who stand are
in a slightly better situation
where many of those
health metrics improve,
but that people that do
a combination of sitting
and standing at the same
desk throughout the day,
or move from one desk to another,
if they don't have a
combination sit-stand desk,
that's going to be best.
The good news is it's very
easy to convert a sit desk
into a stand desk, you
can just stack some boxes,
I've done this at times or stack books.
There are also some pedestals
and things that you can purchase
if that's your preference
in order to set your computer
at a particular height.
And of course there are
desks that have motors
and they're ones that have cranks,
and there are all sorts of variations,
both in terms of the
types and whether or not
they have motors as well as
the cost to these things.
So they can go from very
low cost, like placing boxes
or books to create a standing desk,
to very high cost in some cases.
Now what's interesting,
if you look at a scientific literature,
is that people who
decreased their sitting time
by about half each day.
So they took, let's say they were working
for seven hours a day, three
and a half hours of that day,
they decide to stand,
and it's not even clear
that it matters that they
do all those three hours
in one about, or they divide that up
into shorter bouts of a half an hour,
and then sit for half an hour, et cetera,
alternating back and forth
showed incredibly significant
effects on reduced neck and shoulder pain,
increase in subjective health,
vitality in a work-related environments.
And perhaps most importantly,
for sake of today's discussion
improvement in cognitive conditioning
and the ability to embrace new tasks
and cognitive performance.
There are several studies
that if one wanted to explore,
they could explore this in more detail.
I'll put a link to this as well.
The article that I'm referring to
is called "Effects of a Workplace
"Sit-Stand Desk Intervention
on Health and Productivity."
And I like this paper because
many of the papers out there
focus on the effects of
sit-stand desks on health
in trying to get people
to burn more calories,
improve their posture, relieve neck pain,
slumped over, et cetera,
but not on productivity.
And this particular paper focuses
also on the metrics of productivity,
it has its own study and also references
a number of important studies.
What does this mean for you and me?
Well, I've long used a standing desk
or some variation thereof.
What this means is that
we should probably spend
about half of our work time standing
and about half of it sitting,
but not all sitting or not all standing.
If you had to do all one or the other,
standing is going to
be better than sitting.
What happens if we just stand?
Well, that can also generate
some postural issues
in terms of stabilization and fatigue.
I have a good friend who's in the movement
and physical rehabilitation
and physiology space,
his name is Kelly Starrett,
he's very impressive
in all those domains, and he always says,
we weren't designed to sit all day,
but we also weren't
designed to stand all day.
And I think that's true,
if we were to look back
at our species over tens or
hundreds of thousands of years,
we would find that indeed, we
did sit down, we did lie down.
It wasn't that we were
standing all day long.
That said, almost everybody,
at least in the U.S.,
is not getting sufficient
cardiovascular exercise
or movement throughout the day.
And standing at one's desk can improve
some of those health metrics, and again,
can improve productivity,
probably because of those
postural effects that
I talked about earlier,
that when we lie down, there
tends to be less alertness
in our brainstem, if you will
and there's less activation
of those brainstem circuits
involved in alertness.
And indeed that circuits that involve
a kind of a calming effect
on the body, get activated.
And as we become upright,
standing or sitting,
but especially standing,
then those brainstem circuits
for alertness kick on, which
are going to make it easier
to remain focused.
If you are going to start standing
for half of your work time,
you will notice that it
takes a few days to adapt.
You'll notice a lot of
shifting from side to side,
definitely want to wear comfortable shoes.
Some people do this on a wooden floor,
other people feel uncomfortable
unless they're on carpet.
You have to figure out what works for you,
but it can take a little
bit of time to adapt.
After say after now,
about 10 years of working
at a sit-stand desk, I find
I can't sit for too long
before I want to stand.
And my standing bouts can
be anywhere from 30 minutes
to two hours, although two hours
would be a little bit long.
And then I catch myself
kind of leaning on the desk
off to the side.
So again, the idea is to stand,
but not be leaning on the desk,
obviously, if you're
typing or you're writing,
there'll be some leaning involved,
but that's what the literature support.
There is also a literature
on whether or not
physical movement under your
desk, meaning treadmilling
or in fact, there are now bicycles
that allow people to peddle.
It's kind of a unicycle like thing,
although not a unicycle under the desk,
can be beneficial for
workplace performance.
So let's take a look
at what those data say.
The study that I'm referring
to has a first author,
Frod Sham, F-R-O-D
S-H-A-M, Frod Sham et al.
This is a research article
published in plus one,
and the title of the article is,
"Does Type of Active Workstation Matter:
"A Randomized Comparison of
Cognitive and Typing Performance
"Between Rest, Cycling and
Treadmill, Active Workstation."
It's amazing that people do this science,
I think it's great.
Where else would we get peer-reviewed data
on these types of questions?
First things first, there were
no significant differences
between cycling or treadmill workstations
on any cognitive or typing outcomes.
So it does not seem to
matter whether or not people
are treadmilling under the desk.
So these would be stationary treadmills,
it's like a little conveyor
that people are walking on.
Sometimes very slowly,
I'm guessing some people
walk more quickly, the New Yorkers
probably treadmill quicker.
The California's probably
treadmill a little slower,
I'm in Californian, so I can
make that quote unquote joke,
but nonetheless, there were
no significant differences
between that and a cycling
station where people are sitting
and peddling as they type
away or as they work,
or as they're on phone calls, et cetera.
So it really doesn't seem to matter.
So if you're going to embrace
these active workstations,
as they're called, just decide
what you would prefer to use.
It doesn't seem to matter
in terms of outcomes.
Now, this study involved
looking at 137 young adults.
They had multiple sessions
where they at first completed
cognitive and typing tests,
these tests have different
names, and you're welcome
to look those up if you like,
as well as flanker tasks,
so these are tasks of attention
and things of that sort.
And then they either engaged
in treadmill or cycling
and then there was a comparison.
And the statistics were run,
and basically what they found
was there was a statistically
significant improvement
in attention and cognitive control scores
during any kind of active session,
as opposed to just a mere seated session.
So they compared seated to
cycling to treadmilling.
However, verbal memory
scores actually got worse
during active sessions.
So I'll repeat that, treadmilling
or the cycling workstations,
improved attention
and cognitive control
scores as compared to people
that were just seated and working.
However, verbal memory scores got worse
during the active sessions,
and again, just to repeat,
there was no difference between cycling
and treadmill workstations.
So this is interesting, I
suggest that as the author say
that active workstations,
whether walking or cycling
are not only useful to
improve caloric output
and physical activity,
circulation and so on,
but particularly when completing
tasks like cognitive tasks
or tasks that require
focus that do not require
verbal memory recall.
Now why verbal memory recall
was negatively impacted,
we don't know, it could be
because people were breathing
a little bit harder.
It could be that there's
something about walking
and talking that seems
incompatible in the nervous system,
although I'm not aware of that.
I know a number of people
who can walk and talk
at the same time, but if
you are going to explore
these treadmills or
you're going to explore
these cycling stations,
you probably wouldn't want
to do that for highly verbal work,
maybe more for mathematical
work or for analytic work
or even creative work.
But anything that involves
very precise or detailed
verbal recall, sitting or standing
seems to be the better option.
And if you're wondering
why cycling or treadmilling
would enhance various
aspects of cognition,
we can speculate.
I've talked before about this,
but anytime we are generating
forward movement through our
own actions, our own efforts,
typically, if we are outside,
we're not on a treadmill
or we're out on a bicycle or running,
or even on a motorcycle or in a car,
we have what's called optic flow.
And that optic flow is
known to quiet certain areas
of the brain that are
associated with vigilance
and indeed fear.
This is the basis of things like EMDR,
eye movement desensitization reprocessing.
However, the mere act of
engaging what are called
our central pattern generators,
the neurons in our brain
stem and in our spinal cord
that engage repetitive
movements also can reduce
some of the areas of the
brain that are associated
with anxiety and vigilance.
So one pure speculation, but nonetheless
grounded speculation
would be that treadmilling
or cycling at a desk would reduce anxiety
that would allow performance to improve.
The other, what I think
is more likely explanation
is that anytime we are in ambulation,
we recruit the release of
neuromodulators like epinephrin
dopamine and things of that
sort, that further increase
overall levels of alertness.
I think that's the more likely explanation
because it's hard to imagine
how just a reduction in anxiety
could lead to these
improvements in cognition
in a direct way.
Whereas the subjects in
the study, I just mentioned
on average experienced an increase
in cognitive performance
merely by movement.
And this does not include any optic flow
because it's stationary,
the treadmill or the cycle is stationary.
And so we can rule out that optic flow,
and that points to the idea
that when we are in movement,
we recruit neuromodulators
associated with the so-called
reticular activating system,
the striatal system and so forth,
that would place the
brain into some pattern.
We don't know, we only can
speculate some pattern,
perhaps it's gamma waves
or some other wave pattern
that would engage heightened
levels of focus and attention.
Nonetheless, treadmilling,
cycling at a desk,
does improve cognition.
So we've been discussing
workspace optimization
with the understanding that
you're not always going to work
in the same place every day.
What I've tried to do is give you a set
of high potency tools that
can improve your focus
and cognition, and to place
that within a framework
for particular kinds of work.
Let's just review some
of the basic elements
of what we've covered today.
First of all, in the
first part of your day,
that zero to nine hours after waking,
you want bright lights,
especially overhead lights,
as bright as you can keep them
without feeling uncomfortable,
or certainly not without
feeling any pain in your eyes
or elsewhere in your body.
Bright lights will make for
the maximum state of alertness.
In addition, try and place, whatever it is
that you're focusing on
directly in front of you,
but not have it extend too far out
to either side of your
eyes, try and generate
a fairly restricted visual
window as we call it.
And if you can, try and
place whatever it is
you're focusing on at least
at nose level or above,
that it might take some
engineering or some ingenuity
and creativity in order to
figure out how to do that,
but that's going to be most beneficial.
Try and avoid reclining,
try and avoid sitting,
try and stand for at least
half of your work day.
That's a good goal, and
it may take some time
to work up to that goal.
In addition, if you're going to use sound
as a stimulus for increasing
focus and alertness,
trying to avoid exposure
to white noise, pink noise
or brown noise for
extended periods of time,
for more than an hour or so,
that might actually be damaging
to the auditory system.
And at the very least,
is kind of stressful,
even though you might not notice it,
it's kind of a background
level of anxiety and stress
that is not going to serve you well.
Rather, if you're going
to pursue particular types
of sound frequencies consider
using 40 Hertz binaural beats,
not monaural beats, but
40 Hertz binaural beats
done during a particular
work about or for 30 minutes
prior to that work about.
I would not rely on binaural
beats all the time, every day,
I think that could cause
them to lose their potency,
just because of the way the
auditory system attenuates.
And actually you've
experienced that attenuation,
the mere fact that you
can go into an environment
where there's an air conditioner,
blowing, blowing, blowing,
and then it stops, and
you feel that relaxation,
but you weren't thinking about
the air conditioner before,
it tells you that your auditory system
had kind of attenuated to it
and yet it was still
impacting your system.
You were sensing it, we would
say, but not perceiving it.
There are other things that you can do
to improve your workspace optimization
such as standing for half the
day, as I mentioned before,
but if you're interested in this
or you feel like it
suits you to treadmill,
find a stationary treadmill
that you can walk on.
I've never tried this before,
maybe after this episode,
given what I've read in
the peer-reviewed research,
and it's pretty compelling,
that treadmilling seems
like an interesting way
to increase alertness
and cognitive performance.
I'm not sure that I would
do the cycling method
because I can't imagine just cycling
and typing at the same
time, that sort feels like,
like I actually can do the rub here,
tell me pat your head kind of thing.
But it still feels like a little bit
of a sort of a cognitive
motor collision for me
for whatever reason,
but that's just my bias.
I do know how to ride
a bicycle, but anyway,
you pick your preference.
Some other things that you could do
in order to improve your
workplace performance
would be to consider the cathedral effect.
If you're going to do analytic
work for any part of the day,
phase one or phase two,
as I described them,
but really in any time of day,
that detailed analytic work
for which there is a correct answer,
learning scales of music,
learning mathematics,
trying to figure out the
solution to a problem
where there is indeed a solution.
It could be an interpersonal
problem as well,
then try and get into an environment
with a relatively low ceiling.
If you don't have access to
a low ceiling environment,
you might consider using a
brimmed hat or even a hoodie,
or even just facing down,
or even putting your hand
above your eyes, as you will,
at the level of your eyebrows.
In other words, lower the
ceiling, that's the basis
of the cathedral effects
on analytic performance.
In contrast, if you're interested
in doing brainstorming,
creative work, you're writing new things,
you're creating new things
of any kind, artwork,
consider getting into a high ceiling
or no ceiling environment,
or if you're wearing
a brimmed hat or you're wearing a hoodie,
maybe peel that back.
Again, the data within the
peer reviewed literature
are there to support
these sorts of practices.
And if you'd like to start
layering these protocols,
by all means, please do that.
There's no reason why you couldn't do one
or just two of these protocols.
There's no reason why, for instance,
you couldn't use binaural
beats and try and get
into a low ceiling environment
to do detailed work
a couple times a week,
but you could also employ all of these.
Now, of course, there are an
enormous number of other things
that you can do to
improve work performance
and productivity, and
I've talked about those
in previous episodes, in particular,
in the episode on focus and
the episode on motivation,
there are supplements you can take
that can increase dopamine, for instance.
There are tools that you can
use to increase your focus,
for instance, focusing
your visual attention
on one location for 30 to 60 seconds
prior to entering a focused work about,
this has been shown again and again.
The work from Emily Bell, that's at NYU
in the episode on focus, I
cited a number of studies
where this has actually been tested
and deployed in various schools.
Having kids do a focus
task where they look
at a particular visual
target for 30 to 60 seconds,
then doing some mathematics and seeing
pretty impressive improvement
in focus and attention,
even in people that
have attention deficit,
hyperactivity disorder and so on.
So there's no reason why you
can't and shouldn't combine
the sort of practical workspace
optimization solutions
that we talked about today with the kind
of neural optimization
solutions that we talked about
in the episode on focus
and the episode on ADHD
and the episode on motivation.
By all means, layer those together,
that's how you're going to
achieve the optimal focus bouts,
that's how you're going to achieve
the optimal creativity bouts.
I do want to acknowledge
again, the fact that I realized
people are showing up to this challenge
of workspace optimization
with different budgets,
with different constraints.
Some people have kids at home,
there are a lot of interruption,
some people do not.
Nonetheless, I hope that the information
I was able to provide today will allow you
to make subtle or maybe
even drastic rearrangements
in your workspace environment.
There's one other point related to that,
that I did not cover and
that I'd like to cover
just briefly, which is
that there's nothing to say
that you have to always
work in the same location
all the time.
You can move from house to
cafe if that works for you,
you can move from office to home,
you can also move from different
locations within your home.
I have a brief anecdote about this.
I used to attend a lot
of scientific meetings
when a lot of scientific
meetings were in person,
and there were always a few individuals
that seem to stay engaged
throughout these very long meetings.
And we're talking seven, eight hour day,
sometimes evening sessions,
and sometimes these meetings
would go on for, four or
five or even six days.
These are long meetings
and the quality of talks
vary tremendously, and I
always notice the individuals
that manage to stay engaged and awake
for the entire meeting.
And I noticed that people
that could maintain
high levels of alertness
in this one conference room
had a habit of moving to a different seat
after each session,
sometimes even between talks.
And I actually discussed this
with one of my colleagues
who was doing this, I
said, is this conscious,
are you always moving from place to place?
And he said, yeah, if I
just stay in one place
and I just look from this
one particular visual angle
of the screen, I find
after one or two talks,
regardless of how
interesting the talks are,
that I start take on of draft,
my mind isn't as engaged
and indeed, sometimes can fall asleep.
And so I started this practice of moving
from space to space, or I should say,
seat to seat within an auditorium
and it works quite well.
And I think it works
quite well because again,
of the relationship
between our visual system
driving the majority of our cognition,
our visual system drives our thinking
and that novel visual environments
are going to lend themselves
to heightened levels of alertness.
Now, you don't want things
to be so novel and scary
or threatening or
anxiety-provoking or loud
that they draw your attention
away from your work.
But I think this is part of
the reason why turning on music
or moving to an office or a
cafe or an outdoor environment
from an indoor environment or vice versa,
maybe even within a single
day, can bring about
more heightened levels of productivity.
I'd also like to acknowledge
that what I covered today
is most certainly not exhaustive
for all the types of
workspace optimization tools
that one could create.
For that reason, I'd
love for you to suggest
any of your workspace optimization tools
that you found useful.
Please put those in the
comment section on YouTube,
that would be the best place
than other people can see them.
Also read through those, and
perhaps in a future episode,
I'll call about some of
the ones that I've tried
on the basis of your suggestions.
If you're learning from, and
are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our YouTube channel.
That's a terrific zero
cost way to support us.
Also on YouTube, you can put comments
in the comment section,
so give us feedback.
You can make suggestions for future guests
that you'd like us to host
on The Huberman Lab Podcast.
And in general, you can ask questions.
We do eventually read all the comments
and they do influence our future content.
Please also subscribe
on Apple and/or Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the
opportunity to leave us
up to a five star review.
Please also check out
the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of this podcast episode,
that's the best way to
support the podcast.
We also have a Patreon, it's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman,
and there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
We also have an Instagram
and a Twitter account,
it's Huberman Lab, and
there I teach neuroscience
and neuroscience related tools.
Oftentimes that information
and those tools overlap
with themes on the podcast,
but sometimes they are distinct
from themes and topics
covered on the podcast.
So please follow us on
Instagram and Twitter.
This episode, we didn't talk
too much about supplements,
but on many previous episodes
of The Huberman Lab Podcast,
we talk about supplementation
and while supplementation
isn't required or great for everybody,
some people do derive tremendous
benefit from supplements.
We talked about supplements
for focus, for sleep,
for creativity, all sorts of things.
If you'd like to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne, that's
T-H-O-R-N-E.com/U/Huberman,
there, you can see the
supplements that I take,
you can get 20% off those supplements.
And if you navigate deeper
into the Thorne site,
through that portal, Thorne
thorne.com/u/huberman,
you can also get 20% off.
Any of the other supplements
that Thorne makes.
The reason we partner with Thorne
is because one of the major issues
in the supplement industry is
that many of the supplements
out there don't contain
sufficient quantity,
or they contain too much
of a given supplement.
And the quality of the
ingredients can vary tremendously.
With Thorne supplements,
there is immense stringency
in terms of the quality of the ingredients
and the precision of the
amounts of those ingredients
that they include in each product.
Once again, thank you for
joining me for this discussion
about the science and
peer-reviewed literature
on workspace optimization.
I hope some, if not, all of the tools
will be beneficial for you, and as always
thank you for your interest in science.
[upbeat music]